---
layout: page
---

h1. Installing Tap 

Tap is very easy to install if you already have "Ruby":http://www.ruby-lang.org/en/ and "RubyGems":http://www.rubygems.org/ installed on your computer.  See below if you don't, or if you're not sure.  Once you have these prerequisites installed, open a command prompt and use:

bc.. 
  % gem install tap

p. Install dependencies if prompted to do so.

h2. Uninstall

Not everyone likes or needs Tap.  Open a command prompt and use:

bc.. 
  % gem uninstall tap

p. Your files will NOT be removed.

h1. Installing Ruby and RubyGems

"Ruby":{{ site.links.ruby }} and "RubyGems":{{ site.links.rubygems }} are easy to install on all major operating systems including Mac and Windows.  Many Linux distributions already have Ruby installed by default, as does Mac (although the default Ruby installation on Mac is faulty; Tap requires you reinstall Ruby on Mac).

To test if you have Ruby installed, open a command prompt and type:

bc.. 
  % ruby --version
  ruby 1.8.6 (2007-03-13 patchlevel 0) [i686-darwin8.10.1]

p. The output is for a Mac -- your output will vary if you're not on a Mac.  

Tap is developed on ruby 1.8.6, and tested against ruby 1.9.0; you should use it with caution on earlier versions.  See the main "Ruby Download":{{ site.links.ruby-download }} page for more instructions on installing Ruby if you want more details.  

h2. Installation on Windows

Simply download the "Ruby 1.8.6 One-Click Installer for Windows":{{ site.links.installer.windows }}, double click and you're done.  On the installer website, go to the downloads page and pull down the latest stable version.

h2. (Re)Installation on Mac

Simply download the "Ruby One-Click Installer for OSX":{{ site.links.installer.osx }}, double click and you're done.  
